# Pump it Up: Data Mining the Water Table
November 14, 2016

## Domain Background

Across Africa, cholera, typhoid, dysentery and other diseases kill thousands each year. To help the people of Tanzanian(in 2007), The Tanzanian government, with support from UN Development Programme(UNDP), responded to the water problems by install Drinking Water Taps and Decentralized the maintenance for quick repsonses.Today this water infrastructure is facing repair and maintenance issues causing a disconnection for drinking water needs.

This is also an intermediate-level practice competition by [DrivenData](https://www.drivendata.org/competitions/7).


## Problem Statement
Using data from Taarifa and the Tanzanian Ministry of Water, predicting which pumps are functional, which need some repairs, and which don't work at all. Predict one of these three classes based on a number of variables about what kind of pump is operating, when it was installed, and how it is managed. 



## Datasets and Inputs

Dataset is collected from Taarifa and the Tanzanian Ministry of Water which are available [here](https://www.drivendata.org/competitions/7/data/). Taarifa is an open source platform for the crowd sourced reporting and triaging of infrastructure related issues and Tanzanian Ministry of Water is the central governing body to Tanzania.

Dataset Features:

* amount_tsh - Total static head (amount water available to waterpoint)
* date_recorded - The date the row was entered
* funder - Who funded the well
* gps_height - Altitude of the well
* installer - Organization that installed the well
* longitude - GPS coordinate
* latitude - GPS coordinate
* wpt_name - Name of the waterpoint if there is one
* num_private -
* basin - Geographic water basin
* subvillage - Geographic location
* region - Geographic location
* region_code - Geographic location (coded)
* district_code - Geographic location (coded)
* lga - Geographic location
* ward - Geographic location
* population - Population around the well
* public_meeting - True/False
* recorded_by - Group entering this row of data
* scheme_management - Who operates the waterpoint
* scheme_name - Who operates the waterpoint
* permit - If the waterpoint is permitted
* construction_year - Year the waterpoint was constructed
* extraction_type - The kind of extraction the waterpoint uses
* extraction_type_group - The kind of extraction the waterpoint uses
* extraction_type_class - The kind of extraction the waterpoint uses
* management - How the waterpoint is managed
* management_group - How the waterpoint is managed
* payment - What the water costs
* payment_type - What the water costs
* water_quality - The quality of the water
* quality_group - The quality of the water
* quantity - The quantity of water
* quantity_group - The quantity of water
* source - The source of the water
* source_type - The source of the water
* source_class - The source of the water
* waterpoint_type - The kind of waterpoint
* waterpoint_type_group - The kind of waterpoint


## Solution Statement
A smart understanding of which water points will fail can improve maintenance operations and ensure that clean, potable water is available to communities across Tanzania.

Distribution of Labels
The labels in this dataset are simple. There are three possible values:

* functional - the waterpoint is operational and there are no repairs needed
* functional needs repair - the waterpoint is operational, but needs repairs
* non functional - the waterpoint is not operational



## Benchmark Model
(approximately 1-2 paragraphs)
In this section, provide the details for a benchmark model or result that relates to the domain, problem statement, and intended solution. Ideally, the benchmark model or result contextualizes existing methods or known information in the domain and problem given, which could then be objectively compared to the solution. Describe how the benchmark model or result is measurable (can be measured by some metric and clearly observed) with thorough detail.


## Evaluation Metrics
(approx. 1-2 paragraphs)
In this section, propose at least one evaluation metric that can be used to quantify the performance of both the benchmark model and the solution model. The evaluation metric(s) you propose should be appropriate given the context of the data, the problem statement, and the intended solution. Describe how the evaluation metric(s) are derived and provide an example of their mathematical representations (if applicable). Complex evaluation metrics should be clearly defined and quantifiable (can be expressed in mathematical or logical terms).


The metric used for this competition is the classification rate, which calculates the percentage of rows where the predicted class in the submission matches the actual class in the test set. The maximum is 1 and the minimum is 0. The goal is to maximize the classification rate.

Evaluation Metric

<math display="block">
    <mi>Classification Rate</mi>
    <mo>=</mo>
    <msubsup><mi>(1/N)* ∑</mi>
    			<mi>i=0</mi> <mi>N</mi>
    </msubsup>
    <msubsup><mi> I (Prediction == Actual)</mi>
    </msubsup>
</math>


## Project Design
(approx. 1 page)
In this final section, summarize a theoretical workflow for approaching a solution given the problem. Provide thorough discussion for what strategies you may consider employing, what analysis of the data might be required before being used, or which algorithms will be considered for your implementation. The workflow and discussion that you provide should align with the qualities of the previous sections. Additionally, you are encouraged to include small visualizations, pseudocode, or diagrams to aid in describing the project design, but it is not required. The discussion should clearly outline your intended workflow of the capstone project.




[^1]: asdfa

* [Wikipedia: Water Supply & Sanitation in Tanzanania](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Water_supply_and_sanitation_in_Tanzania)
* [UN Report](http://www.unwater.org/fileadmin/user_upload/unwater_new/docs/Publications/TZA_pagebypage.pdf)
* [UN 2007 Water Taps Installation](http://www.un.org/africarenewal/magazine/april-2007/water-betters-lives-tanzania)
